.. _rst_References:

References
==============

Aber, J.D., Melillo, J.M. and McClaugherty, C.A., 1990. Predicting
long-term patterns of mass loss, nitrogen dynamics, and soil organic
matter formation from initial fime litter chemistry in temperate forest
ecosystems. Canadian Journal of Botany, 68: 2201-2208.

Aber, J.D., Goodale, C.L., Ollinger, S.V., Smith, M.-L., Magill, A.H.,
Martin, M.E., Hallett, R.A., and Stoddard, J.L. 2003. Is nitrogen
deposition altering the nitrogen status of northeastern forests?
BioScience 53:375-389.

Allen, C.B., Will, R.E., and Jacobson, M.A. 2005. Production efficiency
and radiation use efficiency of four tree species receiving irrigation
and fertilization. Forest Science 51:556-569.

Anderson, E.A. 1976. A point energy and mass balance model of a snow
cover. NOAA Technical Report NWS 19, Office of Hydrology, National
Weather Service, Silver Spring, MD.

André, J.-C., Goutorbe, J.-P., and Perrier, A. 1986. HAPEX-MOBILHY: A
hydrologic atmosphere experiment for the study of water budget and
evaporation flux at the climatic scale. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.
67:138-144.

Andrén, O. and Paustian, K., 1987. Barley straw decomposition in the
field: a comparison of models. Ecology 68:1190-1200.

Arah, J.R.M. and Stephen, K.D., 1998. A model of the processes leading
to methane emission from peatland. Atmos. Environ. 32:3257-3264.

Arah, J. and Vinten, A., 1995. Simplified models of anoxia and
denitrification in aggregated and simple-structured soils. European
Journal of Soil Science 46:507-517.

Arendt, A., et al. 2012. Randolph Glacier Inventory: A Dataset of Global
Glacier Outlines Version: 1.0, Global Land Ice Measurements from Space,
Boulder Colorado, USA. Digital Media.

Arora, V.K. and Boer, G.J. 2005. Fire as an interactive component of
dynamic vegetation models. J. Geophys. Res. 110:G02008.
DOI:10.1029/2005JG000042.

Arya, S.P. 2001. Introduction to Meteorology. Academic Press, San Diego,
CA.

Asner, G.P., Wessman, C.A., Schimel, D.S., and Archer, S. 1998.
Variability in leaf and litter optical properties: implications for BRDF
model inversions using AVHRR, MODIS, and MISR. Remote Sens. Environ.
63:243-257.

Axelsson, E., and Axelsson, B. 1986. Changes in carbon allocation
patterns in spruce and pine trees following irrigation and
fertilization. Tree Phys. 2:189-204.

Baird, A.J., Beckwith, C.W., Waldron, S. and Waddington, J.M., 2004.
Ebullition of methane-containing gas bubbles from near-surface Sphagnum
peat. Geophys. Res. Lett. 31. DOI:10.1029/2004GL021157.

Baldocchi, D., et al. 2001. FLUXNET: A new tool to study the temporal
and spatial variability of ecosystem-scale carbon dioxide, water vapor,
and energy flux densities. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 82:2415-2433.

Barbottin, A., Lecomte, C., Bouchard, C., and Jeuffroy, M.-H. 2005.
Nitrogen remobilization during grain filling in wheat: Genotypic and
environmental effects. Crop Sci. 45:1141-1150.

Batjes, N.H., 2006. ISRIC-WISE derived soil properties on a 5 by 5
arc-minutes global grid. Report 2006/02 (available through :
http://www.isric.org)

Berger, A.L. 1978a. Long-term variations of daily insolation and
quaternary climatic changes. J. Atmos. Sci. 35:2362-2367.

Berger, A.L. 1978b. A simple algorithm to compute long-term variations
of daily or monthly insolation. Contribution de l’Institut d’Astronomie
et de Géophysique, Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve,
No. 18.

Berger, A., Loutre, M.-F., and Tricot, C. 1993. Insolation and Earth’s
orbital periods. J. Geophys. Res. 98:10341-10362.

Berkowitz, B., and Balberg, I. 1992. Percolation approach to the problem
of hydraulic conductivity in porous media. Transport in Porous Media
9:275–286.

Beven, K.J., and Kirkby, M.J. 1979. A physically based variable
contributing area model of basin hydrology. Hydrol. Sci. Bull. 24:43-69.

Bohren, C. F., and Huffman, D. R. 1983. Absorption and scattering of
light by small particles. John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.

Bonan, G.B. 1996. A land surface model (LSM version 1.0) for ecological,
hydrological, and atmospheric studies: Technical description and user’s
guide. NCAR Technical Note NCAR/TN-417+STR, National Center for
Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, 150 pp.

Bonan, G.B. 1998. The land surface climatology of the NCAR Land Surface
Model coupled to the NCAR Community Climate Model. J. Climate
11:1307-1326.

Bonan, G.B. 2002. Ecological Climatology: Concepts and Applications.
Cambridge University Press.

Bonan, G.B., Oleson, K.W., Vertenstein, M., Levis, S., Zeng, X., Dai,
Y., Dickinson, R.E., and Yang, Z.-L. 2002a. The land surface climatology
of the Community Land Model coupled to the NCAR Community Climate Model.
J. Climate 15: 3123-3149.

Bonan, G.B., Levis, S., Kergoat, L., and Oleson, K.W. 2002b. Landscapes
as patches of plant functional types: An integrating concept for climate
and ecosystem models. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 16: 5.1-5.23.

Bonan, G.B., and Levis, S. 2006. Evaluating aspects of the Community
Land and Atmosphere Models (CLM3 and CAM3) using a dynamic global
vegetation model. J. Climate 19:2290-2301.

Bonan, G.B., Lawrence P.J., Oleson K.W., Levis S., Jung M., Reichstein
M., Lawrence, D.M., and Swenson, S.C. 2011. Improving canopy processes
in the Community Land Model (CLM4) using global flux fields empirically
inferred from FLUXNET data. J. Geophys. Res. 116, G02014.
DOI:10.1029/2010JG001593.

Bonan, G. B., Oleson, K.W., Fisher, R.A., Lasslop, G., and Reichstein,
M. 2012. Reconciling leaf physiological traits and canopy flux data: Use
of the TRY and FLUXNET databases in the Community Land Model version 4,
J. Geophys. Res., 117, G02026. DOI:10.1029/2011JG001913.

Branstetter, M.L., and Famiglietti, J.S. 1999. Testing the sensitivity
of GCM-simulated runoff to climate model resolution using a parallel
river transport algorithm. Preprints, 14\ :math:`{}^{th}` Conference on
Hydrology, Dallas, TX, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 391-392.

Branstetter, M.L. 2001. Development of a parallel river transport
algorithm and applications to climate studies. Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Texas at Austin.

Brun, E. 1989. Investigation of wet-snow metamorphism in respect of
liquid water content. Ann. Glaciol. 13:22-26.

Bugmann, H., and Solomon, A.M. 2000. Explaining forest composition and
biomass across multiple biogeographical regions. Ecol. Appl. 10:95-114.

Busing, R.T. 2005. Tree mortality, canopy turnover, and woody detritus
in old cove forests of the southern Appalachians. Ecology 86:73-84.

Campbell, G.S., and Norman, J.M. 1998. An Introduction to Environmental
Biophysics (2:math:`{}^{nd}` edition). Springer-Verlag, New York.

Castillo, G., Kendra, C., Levis, S., and Thornton, P. 2012. Evaluation
of the new CNDV option of the Community Land Model: effects of dynamic
vegetation and interactive nitrogen on CLM4 means and variability. J.
Climate 25:3702–3714.

Cao, M., Marshall, S. and Gregson, K., 1996. Global carbon exchange and
methane emissions from natural wetlands: Application of a process-based
model. J. Geophys. Res. 101(D9):14,399-14,414.

Churkina, G. et al., 2003. Analyzing the ecosystem carbon dynamics of
four European coniferous forests using a biogeochemistry model.
Ecosystems, 6: 168-184.

CIESIN: Gridded population of the world version 3 (GPWv3), 2005.
Population density grids, Technical report, Socioeconomic Data and
Applications Center (SEDAC), Columbia University, Palisades, New York,
USA.

Clapp, R.B., and Hornberger, G.M. 1978. Empirical equations for some
soil hydraulic properties. Water Resour. Res. 14:601-604.

Clauser, C., and Huenges, E. 1995. Thermal conductivity of rocks and
minerals. pp. 105-126. In: T. J. Ahrens (editor) Rock Physics and Phase
Relations: A Handbook of Physical Constants. Washington, D.C.

Cleveland, C.C., Townsend, A.R., Schimel, D.S., Fisher, H., Howarth,
R.W., Hedin, L.O., Perakis, S.S., Latty, E.F., Von Fischer, J.C.,
Elseroad, A., and Wasson, M.F. 1999. Global patterns of terrestrial
biological nitrogen (N2) fixation in natural ecosystems. Global
Biogeochem. Cycles 13:623-645.

Collatz, G.J., Ball, J.T., Grivet, C., and Berry, J.A. 1991.
Physiological and environmental regulation of stomatal conductance,
photosynthesis, and transpiration: A model that includes a laminar
boundary layer. Agric. For. Meteor. 54:107-136.

Collatz, G.J., Ribas-Carbo, M., and Berry, J.A. 1992. Coupled
photosynthesis-stomatal conductance model for leaves of
C\ :math:`{}_{4}` plants. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 19:519-538.

Colmer, T.D., 2003. Long-distance transport of gases in plants: a
perspective on internal aeration and radial oxygen loss from roots.
Plant Cell and Environment 26:17-36.

Conway, H., Gades, A., and Raymond, C.F. 1996. Albedo of dirty snow
during conditions of melt. Water Resour. Res. 32:1713-1718.

Cosby, B.J., Hornberger, G.M., Clapp, R.B., and Ginn, T.R. 1984. A
statistical exploration of the relationships of soil moisture
characteristics to the physical properties of soils. Water Resour. Res.
20:682-690.

Crawford, T. W., Rendig, V. V., and Broadent, F. E. 1982. Sources,
fluxes, and sinks of nitrogen during early reproductive growth of maize
(Zea mays L.). Plant Physiol. 70:1645-1660.

Dai, Y., and Zeng, Q. 1997. A land surface model (IAP94) for climate
studies. Part I: formulation and validation in off-line experiments.
Adv. Atmos. Sci. 14:433-460.

Dai, Y., et al. 2001. Common Land Model: Technical documentation and
user’s guide [Available online at
http://climate.eas.gatech.edu/dai/clmdoc.pdf].

Dai, Y., Zeng, X., Dickinson, R.E., Baker, I., Bonan, G.B., Bosilovich,
M.G., Denning, A.S., Dirmeyer, P.A., Houser, P.R., Niu, G., Oleson,
K.W., Schlosser, C.A., and Yang, Z.-L. 2003. The Common Land Model.
Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 84:1013-1023.

Dai, Y., Dickinson, R.E., and Wang, Y.-P. 2004. A two-big-leaf model for
canopy temperature, photosynthesis, and stomatal conductance. J. Climate
17:2281-2299.

Dai, A., and Trenberth, K.E. 2002. Estimates of freshwater discharge
from continents: Latitudinal and seasonal variations. J. Hydrometeor.
3:660-687.

DeFries, R.S., Hansen, M.C., Townshend, J.R.G., Janetos, A.C., and
Loveland, T.R. 2000. A new global 1-km dataset of percentage tree cover
derived from remote sensing. Global Change Biol. 6:247-254.

Degens, B. and Sparling, G., 1996. Changes in aggregation do not
correspond with changes in labile organic C fractions in soil amended
with :math:`{}^{14}`\ C-glucose. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 28(4/5):
453-462.

de Vries, D.A. 1963. Thermal Properties of Soils. In: W.R. van Wijk
(editor) Physics of the Plant Environment. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Dickinson, R.E. 1983. Land surface processes and climate-surface albedos
and energy balance. Adv. Geophys. 25:305-353.

Dickinson, R.E., Henderson-Sellers, A., and Kennedy, P.J. 1993.
Biosphere-Atmosphere Transfer Scheme (BATS) version 1e as coupled to the
NCAR Community Climate Model. NCAR Technical Note NCAR/TN-387+STR.
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO.

Dickinson, R.E., Oleson, K.W., Bonan, G., Hoffman, F., Thornton, P.,
Vertenstein, M., Yang, Z.-L., and Zeng, X. 2006. The Community Land
Model and its climate statistics as a component of the Community Climate
System Model. J. Climate 19:2302-2324.

Dingman, S.L. 2002. Physical Hydrology. Second Edition. Prentice Hall,
NJ.

Dirmeyer, P.A., Dolman, A.J., and Sato, N. 1999. The pilot phase of the
Global Soil Wetness Project. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 80:851-878.

Dobson, J.E., Bright, E.A., Coleman, P.R., Durfee, R.C., and Worley,
B.A. 2000. LandScan: A global population database for estimating
populations at risk. Photogramm. Eng. Rem. Sens. 66:849-857.

Dorman, J.L., and Sellers, P.J. 1989. A global climatology of albedo,
roughness length and stomatal resistance for atmospheric general
circulation models as represented by the simple biosphere model (SiB).
J. Appl. Meteor. 28:833-855.

Dougherty, R.L., Bradford, J.A., Coyne, P.I., and Sims, P.L. 1994.
Applying an empirical model of stomatal conductance to three C4 grasses.
Agric. For. Meteor. 67:269-290.

Drewniak, B., Song, J., Prell, J., Kotamarthi, V.R., and Jacob, R. 2013.
Modeling agriculture in the Community Land Model. Geosci. Model Dev.
6:495-515. DOI:10.5194/gmd-6-495-2013.

Dunfield, P., Knowles, R., Dumont, R. and Moore, T.R., 1993. Methane
Production and Consumption in Temperate and Sub-Arctic Peat Soils -
Response to Temperature and Ph. Soil Biology & Biochemistry 25:321-326.

Entekhabi, D., and Eagleson, P.S. 1989. Land surface hydrology
parameterization for atmospheric general circulation models including
subgrid scale spatial variability. J. Climate 2:816-831.

Fang, X. and Stefan, H.G., 1996. Long-term lake water temperature and
ice cover simulations/measurements. Cold Regions Science and Technology
24:289-304.

Farouki, O.T. 1981. The thermal properties of soils in cold regions.
Cold Regions Sci. and Tech. 5:67-75.

Farquhar, G.D., von Caemmerer, S., and Berry, J.A. 1980. A biochemical
model of photosynthetic CO\ :sub:`2` assimilation in leaves of
C\ :math:`{}_{3}` species. Planta 149:78-90.

Farquhar, G.D., and von Caemmerer, S. 1982. Modeling of photosynthetic
response to environmental conditions. pp. 549-587. In: O.L. Lange, P.S.
Nobel, C.B. Osmond, and H. Zeigler (editors) Encyclopedia of Plant
Physiology. Vol. 12B. Physiological Plant Ecology. II. Water Relations
and Carbon Assimilation. Springer-Verlag, New York.

Ferrari, J.B., 1999. Fine-scale patterns of leaf litterfall and nitrogen
cycling in an old-growth forest. Canadian Journal of Forest Research,
29: 291-302.

Firestone, M.K. and Davidson, E.A. 1989. Exchange of Trace Gases between
Terrestrial Ecosystems and the Atmosphere. In: M.O. Andreae and D.S.
Schimel (Editors). John Wiley and Sons, pp. 7-21.

Flanner, M.G., and Zender. C.S. 2005. Snowpack radiative heating:
Influence on Tibetan Plateau climate. Geophys. Res. Lett. 32:L06501.
DOI:10.1029/2004GL022076.

Flanner, M.G., and Zender, C.S. 2006. Linking snowpack microphysics and
albedo evolution. J. Geophys. Res. 111:D12208. DOI:10.1029/2005JD006834.

Flanner, M.G., Zender, C.S., Randerson, J.T., and Rasch, P.J. 2007.
Present day climate forcing and response from black carbon in snow. J.
Geophys. Res. 112:D11202. DOI:10.1029/2006JD008003.

Flatau, P.J., Walko, R.L., and Cotton, W.R. 1992. Polynomial fits to
saturation vapor pressure. J. Appl. Meteor. 31:1507-1513.

Friedl, M.A., McIver, D.K., Hodges, J.C.F., Zhang, X.Y., Muchoney, D.,
Strahler, A.H., Woodcock, C.E., Gopal, S., Schneider, A., Cooper, A.,
Baccini, A., Gao, F., and Schaaf, C. 2002. Global land cover mapping
from MODIS: algorithms and early results. Remote Sens. Environ.
83:287-302.

Frolking, S., et al. 2001. Modeling Northern Peatland Decomposition and
Peat Accumulation. Ecosystems. 4:479-498.

Gallais, A., Coque, M. Quillere, I., Prioul, J., and Hirel, B. 2006.
Modeling postsilking nitrogen fluxes in maize (Zea mays) using
15N-labeling field experiments. New Phytologist 172:696-707.

Gallais, A., Coque, M., Gouis, J. L., Prioul, J. L., Hirel, B., and
Quillere, I. 2007. Estimating the proportion of nitrogen remobilization
and of postsilking nitrogen uptake allocated to maize kernels by
Nitrogen-15 labeling. Crop Sci. 47:685-693.

Galloway, J.N., et al. 2004. Nitrogen cycles: past, present, and future.
Biogeochem. 70:153-226.

Garcia, R.L., Kanemasu, E.T., Blad, B.L., Bauer, A., Hatfield, J.L.,
Major, D.A., Reginato, R.J., and Hubbard, K.G. 1988. Interception and
use efficiency of light in winter wheat under different nitrogen
regimes. Agric. For. Meteor. 44:175-186.

Gash, J.H.C., Nobre, C.A., Roberts, J.M., and Victoria, R.L. 1996. An
overview of ABRACOS. pp. 1-14. In: J.H.C. Gash, C.A. Nobre, J.M.
Roberts, and R.L. Victoria (editors) Amazonian Deforestation and
Climate. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, England.

Gholz, H.L., Perry, C.S., Cropper, W.P., Jr. and Hendry, L.C., 1985.
Litterfall, decomposition, and nitrogen and phosphorous dynamics in a
chronosequence of slash pine (*Pinus elliottii*) plantations. Forest
Science, 31: 463-478.

Giglio, L., Csiszar, I., and Justice, C.O. 2006. Global distribution and
seasonality of active fires as observed with the Terra and Aqua Moderate
Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) sensors. J. Geophys. Res.
111:G02016. DOI:10.1029/2005JG000142.

Global Soil Data Task 2000. Global soil data products CD-ROM (IGBP-DIS).
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme-Data and Information
Available Services [Available online at http://www.daac.ornl.gov].

Gomes, E.P.C., Mantovani, W., and Kageyama, P.Y. 2003. Mortality and
recruitment of trees in a secondary montane rain forest in southeastern
Brazil. Brazilian Journal of Biology 63:47-60.

Gosz, J.R., Likens, G.E., and Bormann, F.H. 1973. Nutrient release from
decomposing leaf and branch litter in the Hubbard Brook Forest, New
Hampshire. Ecological Monographs 43:173-191.

Gotangco Castillo C., Levis S., and Thornton P. 2012. Evaluation of the
new CNDV option of the Community Land Model: Effects of dynamic
vegetation and interactive nitrogen on CLM4 means and variability. J.
Climate 25:3702-3714. DOI:10.1175/JCLID-11-00372.1.

Graham, S.T., Famiglietti, J.S., and Maidment, D.R. 1999. Five-minute,
1/2º, and 1º data sets of continental watersheds and river networks for
use in regional and global hydrologic and climate system modeling
studies. Water Resour. Res. 35:583-587.

Grenfell, T.C., and Warren, S.G. 1999. Representation of a nonspherical
ice particle by a collection of independent spheres for scattering and
absorption of radiation. J. Geophys. Res. 104(D24):37697-37709.

del Grosso, S.J., et al. 2000. General model for N2O and N2 gas
emissions from soils due to dentrification. Global Biogeochem. Cycles
14:1045-1060.

Guenther, A., Hewitt, C.N., Erickson, D., Fall, R., Geron, C., Graedel,
T., Harley, P., Klinger, L., Lerdau, M., McKay, W.A., Pierce, T.,
Scholes, B., Steinbrecher, R., Tallamraju, R., Taylor, J., and
Zimmerman, P. 1995. A global model of natural volatile organic compound
emissions. J. Geophys. Res. 100:8873-8892.

Guenther, A., Karl, T., Harley, P., Wiedinmyer, C., Palmer. P.I., and
Geron, C. 2006. Estimates of global terrestrial isoprene emissions using
MEGAN (Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature). Atmos.
Chem. Phys. 6:3181–3210.

Guenther, A. B., Jiang, X., Heald, C. L., Sakulyanontvittaya, T., Duhl,
T., Emmons, L. K., & Wang, X., 2012. The Model of Emissions of Gases and
Aerosols from Nature version 2.1 (MEGAN2.1): an extended and updated
framework for modeling biogenic emissions, Geosci. Model Dev., 5,
1471–1492. DOI:10.5194.

Hack, J.J., Caron, J.M., Yeager, S.G., Oleson, K.W., Holland, M.M.,
Truesdale, J.E., and Rasch, P.J. 2006. Simulation of the global
hydrological cycle in the CCSM Community Atmosphere Model version 3
(CAM3): mean features. J. Climate 19:2199-2221.

Hansen, M., DeFries, R.S., Townshend, J.R.G., Carroll, M., Dimiceli, C.,
and Sohlberg, R.A. 2003. Global percent tree cover at a spatial
resolution of 500 meters: first results of the MODIS vegetation
continuous fields algorithm. Earth Interactions 7:1-15.

Hastings, D.A., Dunbar, P.K., Elphingstone, G.M., Bootz, M., Murakami,
H., Maruyama, H., Masaharu, H., Holland, P., Payne, J., Bryant, N.A.,
Logan, T.L., Muller, J.-P., Schreier, G., and MacDonald, J.S., eds.,
1999. The Global Land One-kilometer Base Elevation (GLOBE) Digital
Elevation Model, Version 1.0. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Geophysical Data Center, 325 Broadway, Boulder,
Colorado 80305-3328, U.S.A.

Heald, C.L., Henze, D.K., Horowitz, L.W., Feddema, J., Lamarque, J.-F.,
Guenther, A., Hess, P.G., Vitt, F., Seinfeld, J.H., Goldstein, A.H., and
Fung, I. 2008. Predicted change in global secondary organic aerosol
concentrations in response to future climate, emissions, and land use
change. J. Geophys. Res. 113:D05211. DOI:10.1029/2007JD009092.

Heald, C.L., Wilkinson, M.J., Monson, R.K., Alo, C.A., Wang, G.L., and
Guenther, A. 2009. Response of isoprene emission to ambient
CO\ :sub:`2` changes and implications for global budgets. Global
Change Biol. 15:1127-1140. DOI:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01802.x

Henderson-Sellers, B. 1985. New formulation of eddy diffusion
thermocline models. Appl. Math. Modelling 9:441-446.

Henderson-Sellers, B. 1986. Calculating the surface energy balance for
lake and reservoir modeling: A review. Rev. Geophys. 24:625-649.

Henderson-Sellers, A., Yang, Z.-L., and Dickinson, R.E. 1993. The
project for intercomparison of land-surface parameterization schemes.
Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 74: 1335-1349.

Hostetler, S.W., and Bartlein, P.J. 1990. Simulation of lake evaporation
with application to modeling lake level variations of Harney-Malheur
Lake, Oregon. Water Resour. Res. 26:2603-2612.

Hostetler, S.W., Bates, G.T., and Giorgi, F. 1993. Interactive coupling
of a lake thermal model with a regional climate model. J. Geophys. Res.
98:5045-5057.

Hostetler, S.W., Giorgi, F., Bates, G.T., and Bartlein, P.J. 1994.
Lake-atmosphere feedbacks associated with paleolakes Bonneville and
Lahontan. Science 263:665-668.

Hou, Z., Huang, M., Leung, L.R., Lin, G., and Ricciuto, D.M. 2012.
Sensitivity of surface flux simulations to hydrologic parameters based
on an uncertainty quantification framework applied to the Community Land
Model. J. Geophys. Res. 117:D15108.

Huang, M., and Liang, X. 2006. On the assessment of the impact of
reducing parameters and identification of parameter uncertainties for a
hydrologic model with applications to ungauged basins. J. Hydrol.
320:37-61.

Hugelius, G., C. Tarnocai, G. Broll, J.G. Canadell, P. Kuhry, adn D.K.
Swanson, 2012. The Northern Circumpolar Soil Carbon Database: spatially
distributed datasets of soil coverage and soil carbon storage in the
northern permafrost regions. Earth Syst. Sci. Data Discuss., 5, 707-733
(available online at (http://dev1.geo.su.se/bbcc/dev/ncscd/).

Hunt, H.W., Ingham, E.R., Coleman, D.C., Elliott, E.T., and Reid, C.P.P.
1988. Nitrogen limitation of production and decomposition in prairie,
mountain meadow, and pine forest. Ecology 69:1009-1016.

Hunt, E.R., Jr. and Running, S.W., 1992. Simulated dry matter yields for
aspen and spruce stands in the north american boreal forest. Canadian
Journal of Remote Sensing, 18: 126-133.

Hunt, E.R., Jr. et al., 1996. Global net carbon exchange and
intra-annual atmospheric CO\ :sub:`2` concentrations predicted by
an ecosystem process model and three-dimensional atmospheric transport
model. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 10: 431-456.

Hurtt, G.C., Frolking, S., Fearon, M.G., Moore, B., Shevliakova, E.,
Malyshev, S., Pacala, S.W., and Houghton, R.A. 2006. The underpinnings
of land-use history: three centuries of global gridded land-use
transitions, wood-harvest activity, and resulting secondary lands.
Global Change Biol. 12:1208-1229.

Hurtt, G.C., et al. 2011. Harmonization of land-use scenarios for the
period 1500-2100: 600 years of global gridded annual land-use
transitions, wood harvest, and resulting secondary lands. Climatic
Change 109:117-161. DOI:10.1007/s10584-011-0153-2.

Idso, S.B. 1981. A set of equations for full spectrum and 8- to
14-\ :math:`\mu` \ m and 10.5- to 12.5-\ :math:`\mu` \ m thermal
radiation from cloudless skies. Water Resour. Res. 17:295-304.

Iiyama, I. and Hasegawa, S., 2005. Gas diffusion coefficient of
undisturbed peat soils. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 51:431-435.

Jackson, R. B., Canadell, J., Ehleringer, J. R., Mooney, H. A., Sala, O.
E., and Schulze, E. D. 1996. A global analysis of root distributions for
terrestrial biomes Oecologia 108:389–411. DOI:10.1007/BF00333714.

Jackson, T.L., Feddema, J.J., Oleson, K.W., Bonan, G.B., and Bauer, J.T.
2010. Parameterization of urban characteristics for global climate
modeling. Annals of the Association of American Geographers.
100:848-865.

Jenkinson, D. and Coleman, K. 2008. The turnover of organic carbon in
subsoils. Part 2. Modelling carbon turnover. European Journal of Soil
Science 59:400-413.

Jordan, R. 1991. A One-dimensional Temperature Model for a Snow Cover:
Technical Documentation for SNTHERM.89. U.S. Army Cold Regions Research
and Engineering Laboratory, Special Report 91-16.

Kattge, J., and Knorr, W. 2007. Temperature acclimation in a biochemical
model of photosynthesis: a reanalysis of data from 36 species. Plant
Cell Environ. 30:1176-1190. DOI:10.1111/j.1365-3040.2007.01690.x.

Kattge, J., Knorr, W., Raddatz, T., and Wirth C. 2009: Quantifying
photosynthetic capacity and its relationship to leaf nitrogen content
for global–scale terrestrial biosphere models. Global Change Biol.
15:976–991.

Keller, M., Palace, M., Asner, G.P., Pereira, R., Jr. and Silva, J.N.M.,
2004. Coarse woody debris in undisturbed and logged forests in the
eastern Brazilian Amazon. Global Change Biology, 10: 784-795.

Kellner, E., Baird, A.J., Oosterwoud, M., Harrison, K. and Waddington,
J.M., 2006. Effect of temperature and atmospheric pressure on methane
(CH4) ebullition from near-surface peats. Geophys. Res. Lett. 33.
DOI:10.1029/2006GL027509.

Kimball, J.S., Thornton, P.E., White, M.A. and Running, S.W. 1997.
Simulating forest productivity and surface-atmosphere exchange in the
BOREAS study region. Tree Physiology 17:589-599.

Kohyama, T., Suzuki, E., Partomihardjo, T., and Yamada, T. 2001. Dynamic
steady state of patch-mosaic tree size structure of a mixed diptocarp
forest regulated by local crowding. Ecological Research 16:85-98.

Kourzeneva, E., 2009. Global dataset for the parameterization of lakes
in Numerical Weather Prediction and Climate modeling. ALADIN Newsletter,
No 37, July-December, 2009, F. Bouttier and C. Fischer, Eds.,
Meteo-France, Toulouse, France, 46-53.

Kourzeneva, E., 2010: External data for lake parameterization in
Numerical Weather Prediction and climate modeling. Boreal Environment
Research, 15, 165-177.

Kourzeneva, E., Asensio, H., Martin, E. and Faroux, S., 2012. Global
gridded dataset of lake coverage and lake depth for use in numerical
weather prediction and climate modelling. Tellus A 64.

Koven, C., et al. 2009. On the formation of high-latitude soil carbon
stocks: The effects of cryoturbation and insulation by organic matter in
a land surface model. Geophys. Res. Lett. 36: L21501.

Koven, C.D., et al. 2011. Permafrost carbon-climate feedbacks accelerate
global warming. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
108:14769-14774.

Koven, C.D. et al. 2013. The effect of vertically-resolved soil
biogeochemistry and alternate soil C and N models on C dynamics of CLM4.
Biogeosciences Discussions 10:7201-7256.

Kucharik, C.J., Foley, J.A., Delire, C., Fisher, V.A., Coe, M.T.,
Lenters, J.D., Young-Molling, C., and Ramankutty, N. 2000. Testing the
performance of a dynamic global ecosystem model: water balance, carbon
balance, and vegetation structure. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 14:
795–825.

Kucharik, C.J., and Brye, K.R. 2003. Integrated BIosphere Simulator
(IBIS) yield and nitrate loss predictions for Wisconsin maize receiving
varied amounts of nitrogen fertilizer. Journal of Environmental Quality
32: 247–268.

Ladd, J.N., Jocteur-Monrozier, L. and Amato, M., 1992. Carbon turnover
and nitrogen transformations in an alfisol and vertisol amended with
[U-:math:`{}^{14}`\ C] glucose and [:math:`{}^{15}`\ N] ammonium
sulfate. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 24: 359-371.

Lamarque, J.-F., et al. 2010. Historical (1850-2000) gridded
anthropogenic and biomass burning emissions of reactive gases and
aerosols: methodology and application. Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss.
10:4963-5019. DOI:10.5194/acpd-10-4963-2010.

Larcher, W. 1995. Physiological Plant Ecology, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
Heidelberg.

Lavigne, M.B., and Ryan, M.G. 1997. Growth and maintenance respiration
rates of aspen, black spruce, and jack pine stems at northern and
southern BOREAS sites. Tree Phys. 17:543-551.

Law, B.E., Sun, O.J., Campbell, J., Van Tuyl, S. and Thornton, P.E.
2003. Changes in carbon storage and fluxes in a chronosequence of
ponderosa pine. Global Change Biology, 9: 510-514.

Lawrence, D.M., Thornton, P.E., Oleson, K.W., and Bonan, G.B. 2007. The
partitioning of evapotranspiration into transpiration, soil evaporation,
and canopy evaporation in a GCM: Impacts on land-atmosphere interaction.
J. Hydrometeor. 8:862-880.

Lawrence, D.M., and Slater, A.G. 2008. Incorporating organic soil into a
global climate model. Clim. Dyn. 30. DOI:10.1007/s00382-007-0278-1.

Lawrence, D.M., Slater, A.G., Romanovsky, V.E., and Nicolsky, D.J. 2008.
The sensitivity of a model projection of near-surface permafrost
degradation to soil column depth and inclusion of soil organic matter.
J. Geophys. Res. 113:F02011. DOI:10.1029/2007JF000883.

Lawrence, D.M., K.W. Oleson, M.G. Flanner, P.E. Thornton, S.C. Swenson,
P.J. Lawrence, X. Zeng, Z.-L. Yang, S. Levis, K. Sakaguchi, G.B. Bonan,
and A.G. Slater, 2011. Parameterization improvements and functional and
structural advances in version 4 of the Community Land Model. J. Adv.
Model. Earth Sys. 3. DOI:10.1029/2011MS000045.

Lawrence, P.J., and Chase, T.N. 2007. Representing a MODIS consistent
land surface in the Community Land Model (CLM 3.0). J. Geophys. Res.
112:G01023. DOI:10.1029/2006JG000168.

Lawrence, P.J., and Chase, T.N. 2010. Investigating the climate impacts
of global land cover change in the Community Climate System Model. Int.
J. Climatol. 30:2066-2087. DOI:10.1002/joc.2061.

Lawrence, P.J., et al. 2012. Simulating the biogeochemical and
biogeophysical impacts of transient land cover change and wood harvest
in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM4) from 1850 to 2100. J.
Climate 25:3071-3095. DOI:10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00256.1.

Lehner, B. and Döll, P., 2004. Development and validation of a global
database of lakes, reservoirs and wetlands, J. Hydrol., 296, 1–22.

Le Page, Y., van der Werf, G.R., Morton, D.C., and Pereira, J.M.C. 2010.
Modeling fire-driven deforestation potential in Amazonia under current
and projected climate conditions. J. Geophys. Res. 115:G03012.
DOI:10.1029/2009JG001190.

Lerman, A., 1979. Geochemical processes: Water and sediment
environments. John Wiley and Sons, New York, N.Y.

Letts, M.G., Roulet, N.T., Comer, N.T., Skarupa, M.R., and Verseghy,
D.L. 2000. Parametrization of peatland hydraulic properties for the
Canadian Land Surface Scheme. Atmos.-Ocean 38:141-160.

Levin, I. and Kromer, B. 2004. The tropospheric 14CO2 level in
mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere (1959-2003) Radiocarbon 46:1.

Levis, S., Wiedinmyer, C., Bonan, G.B., and Guenther, A. 2003.
Simulating biogenic volatile organic compound emissions in the Community
Climate System Model. J. Geophys. Res. 108:4659.
DOI:10.1029/2002JD003203.

Levis, S., Bonan, G.B., Vertenstein, M., and Oleson, K.W. 2004. The
community land model’s dynamic global vegetation model (CLM-DGVM):
technical description and user’s guide. NCAR Technical Note
NCAR/TN-459+STR. National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder,
Colorado. 50 pp.

Levis, S., Thornton, P., Bonan, G., and Kucharik, C. 2009. Modeling land
use and land management with the Community Land Model. iLeaps
newsletter, No. 7.

Levis, S., Bonan, G., Kluzek, E., Thornton, P., Jones, A., Sacks, W.,
and Kucharik, C 2012. Interactive crop management in the Community Earth
System Model (CESM1): Seasonal influences on land-atmosphere fluxes. J.
Climate 25: 4839-4859. DOI:10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00446.1.

Li, C., Aber, J., Stange, F., Butterbach-Bahl, K. and Papen, H. 2000. A
process-oriented model of N2O and NO emissions from forest soils: 1.
Model development. J. Geophys. Res. 105(D4):4369-4384.

Li, F., Zeng, X.-D., and Levis, S. 2012a. A process-based fire
parameterization of intermediate complexity in a Dynamic Global
Vegetation Model. Biogeosciences 9:2761-2780.

Li, F., Zeng, X. D., and Levis, S. 2012b. Corrigendum to “A
process-based fire parameterization of intermediate complexity in a
Dynamic Global Vegetation Model” published in Biogeosciences, 9,
2761–2780, 2012”. Biogeosciences 9: 4771-4772.

Li, F., Levis, S., and Ward, D. S. 2013a. Quantifying the role of fire
in the Earth system – Part 1: Improved global fire modeling in the
Community Earth System Model (CESM1). Biogeosciences 10:2293-2314.

Li, H.-Y., Huang, M., Tesfa, T., Ke, Y., Sun, Y., Liu, Y., and Leung, L.
R. 2013b. A subbasin-based framework to represent land surface processes
in an Earth System Model, Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss. 6:2699-2730.
DOI:10.5194/gmdd-6-2699-2013.

Li, H., Huang, M., Wigmosta, M.S., Ke, Y., Coleman, A.M., Leung, L.R.,
Wang, A., and Ricciuto, D.M. 2011. Evaluating runoff simulations from
the Community Land Model 4.0 using observations from flux towers and a
mountainous watershed. J. Geophys. Res. 116:D24120.
DOI:10.1029/2011JD016276.

Liang, X., Lettenmaier, D.P., Wood, E.F., and Burges, S.J. 1994. A
simple hydrologically based model of land surface water and energy
fluxes for GSMs. J. Geophys. Res. 99(D7):14,415–14,428.

Lipscomb, W., and Sacks, W. 2012. The CESM land ice model documentation
and user’s guide. 46 pp. [Available online at
http://www.cesm.ucar.edu/models/cesm1.1/cism/].

Lloyd, J. and Taylor, J.A., 1994. On the temperature dependence of soil
respiration. Functional Ecology, 8: 315-323.

Lloyd, J., et al. 2010. Optimisation of photosynthetic carbon gain and
within-canopy gradients of associated foliar traits for Amazon forest
trees. Biogeosci. 7:1833-1859. DOI:10.5194/bg-7-1833-2010.

Lobell, D.B., Bala, G., and Duffy, P.B. 2006. Biogeophysical impacts of
cropland management changes on climate. Geophys. Res. Lett. 33:L06708.
DOI:10.1029/2005GL025492.

Loveland, T.R., Reed, B.C., Brown, J.F., Ohlen, D.O., Zhu, Z., Yang, L.,
and Merchant, J.W. 2000. Development of a global land cover
characteristics database and IGBP DISCover from 1 km AVHRR data. Int. J.
Remote Sens. 21:1303-1330.

Lowe, P.R. 1977. An approximating polynomial for the computation of
saturation vapor pressure. J. Appl. Meteor. 16:100-103.

Luo, Y., Hui, D., and Zhang, D. 2006. Elevated CO2 stimulates net
accumulations of carbon and nitrogen in land ecosystems: a
meta-analysis. Ecology 87:53-63.

Magill, A.H. et al., 1997. Biogeochemical response of forest ecosystems
to simulated chronic nitrogen deposition. Ecological Applications, 7:
402-415.

Mahowald, N.M., Muhs, D.R., Levis, S., Rasch, P.J., Yoshioka, M.,
Zender, C.S., and Luo, C. 2006. Change in atmospheric mineral aerosols
in response to climate: last glacial period, pre-industrial, modern and
doubled CO\ :sub:`2` climates. J. Geophys. Res\ *.* 111:D10202.
DOI:10.1029/2005JD006653.

Makela, A. 2002. Derivation of stem taper from the pipe model theory in
a carbon balance framework. Tree Phys. 22:891-905.

Manning, M.R. and Melhuish, W.H. 1994. Trends: A Compendium of Data on
Global Change. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center,. Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A.

Mao, J., Thornton, P.E., Shi, X., Zhao, M., and Post, W.M. 2012. Remote
sensing evaluation of CLM4 GPP for the period 2000 to 2009. J. Climate
25:5327-5342.

Mao, J., Shi, X., Thornton, P.E., Hoffman, F.M., Zhu, Z., and Ranga B.
Myneni, R.B. 2013. Global latitudinal-asymmetric vegetation growth
trends and their driving mechanisms: 1982-2009. Remote Sensing
5:1484-1497.

Martin, J.P., Haider, K. and Kassim, G., 1980. Biodegradation and
stabilization after 2 years of specific crop, lignin, and polysaccharide
carbons in soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal 44:1250-1255.

Mary, B., Fresneau, C., Morel, J.L. and Mariotti, A., 1993. C and N
cycling during decomposition of root mucilage, roots and glucose in
soil. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 25:1005-1014.

McGuire, A.D., Melillo, J.M., Joyce, L.A., Kicklighter, D.W., Grace,
A.L., Moore III, B., and Vorosmarty, C.J. 1992. Interactions between
carbon and nitrogen dynamics in estimating net primary productivity for
potential vegetation in North America. Global Biogeochem. Cycles
6:101-124.

Melzer, E., and O’Leary, M.H. 1987. Anapleurotic CO2 Fixation by
Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase in C3 Plants. Plant. Physiol. 84:58.

Miller, J.R., Russell, G.L., and Caliri, G. 1994. Continental-scale
river flow in climate models. J. Climate 7:914-928.

Millington, R. and Quirk, J.P., 1961. Permeability of Porous Solids.
Transactions of the Faraday Society 57:1200-1207.

Mironov, D. et al., 2010. Implementation of the lake parameterisation
scheme FLake into the numerical weather prediction model COSMO. Boreal
Environment Research 15:218-230.

Mitchell, T.D., and Jones, P.D. 2005. An improved method of constructing
a database of monthly climate observations and associated
high-resolution grids. Int. J. Climatol. 25:693-712.

Moldrup, P. et al. 2003. Modeling diffusion and reaction in soils: X. A
unifying model for solute and gas diffusivity in unsaturated soil. Soil
Science 168:321-337.

Myneni, R.B., et al. 2002. Global products of vegetation leaf area and
fraction absorbed PAR from year one of MODIS data. Remote Sens. Environ.
83:214-231.

Neff, J.C., Harden, J.W. and Gleixner, G. 2005. Fire effects on soil
organic matter content, composition, and nutrients in boreal interior
Alaska. Canadian Journal of Forest Research-Revue Canadienne De
Recherche Forestiere 35:2178-2187.

Neitsch, S.L., Arnold, J.G., Kiniry, J.R., and Williams J.R. 2005. Soil
and Water Assessment Tool, Theoretical Documentation: Version 2005.
Temple, TX. USDA Agricultural Research Service and Texas A&M Blackland
Research Center.

Nemani, R.R., and Running, S.W. 1996. Implementation of a hierarchical
global vegetation classification in ecosystem function models. J. Veg.
Sci. 7:337-346.

Niinemets, U., Kull, O., and Tenhunen, J.D. 1998. An analysis of light
effects on foliar morphology, physiology, and light interception in
temperate deciduous woody species of contrasting shade tolerance. Tree
Phys. 18:681-696.

Niu, G.-Y., Yang, Z.-L., Dickinson, R.E., and Gulden, L.E. 2005. A
simple TOPMODEL-based runoff parameterization (SIMTOP) for use in global
climate models. J. Geophys. Res. 110:D21106. DOI:10.1029/2005JD006111.

Niu, G.-Y., and Yang, Z.-L. 2006. Effects of frozen soil on snowmelt
runoff and soil water storage at a continental scale. J. Hydrometeor.
7:937-952.

Niu, G.-Y., Yang, Z.-L., Dickinson, R.E., Gulden, L.E., and Su, H. 2007.
Development of a simple groundwater model for use in climate models and
evaluation with Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment data. J.
Geophys. Res. 112:D07103. DOI:10.1029/2006JD007522.

Niu, G.-Y., and Yang, Z.-L. 2007. An observation-based formulation of
snow cover fraction and its evaluation over large North American river
basins. J. Geophys. Res. 112:D21101. DOI:10.1029/2007JD008674.

Nydal, R. and Lövseth, K. 1996. Carbon-14 Measurements In Atmospheric
CO2 From Northern And Southern Hemisphere Sites, 1962-1993, Carbon
Dioxide Information Analysis Center.

Oikawa, S., Hikosaka, K. and Hirose, T., 2005. Dynamics of leaf area and
nitrogen in the canopy of an annual herb, Xanthium canadense. Oecologia,
143: 517-526.

Oke, T. 1987. Boundary Layer Climates (2:math:`{}^{nd}` edition).
Routledge, London and New York.

Oleson, K.W., and Bonan, G.B. 2000. The effects of remotely-sensed plant
functional type and leaf area index on simulations of boreal forest
surface fluxes by the NCAR land surface model. J. Hydrometeor.
1:431-446.

Oleson, K.W., Dai, Y., Bonan, G., Bosilovich, M., Dickinson, R.,
Dirmeyer, P., Hoffman, F., Houser, P., Levis, S., Niu, G.-Y., Thornton,
P., Vertenstein, M., Yang, Z.-L., and Zeng. X. 2004. Technical
description of the Community Land Model (CLM). NCAR Technical Note
NCAR/TN-461+STR. National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder,
Colorado. 173 pp.

Oleson, K.W., Niu, G.-Y., Yang, Z.-L., Lawrence, D.M., Thornton, P.E.,
Lawrence, P.J., Stöckli, R., Dickinson, R.E., Bonan, G.B., Levis, S.,
Dai, A., and Qian, T. 2008a. Improvements to the Community Land Model
and their impact on the hydrological cycle. J. Geophys. Res. 113:G01021.
DOI:10.1029/2007JG000563.

Oleson, K.W., Bonan, G.B., Feddema, J., Vertenstein, M., and Grimmond,
C.S.B. 2008b. An urban parameterization for a global climate model. 1.
Formulation and evaluation for two cities. J. Appl. Meteor. Clim.
47:1038-1060.

Oleson, K.W., Bonan, G.B., Feddema, J., and Vertenstein, M. 2008c. An
urban parameterization for a global climate model. 2. Sensitivity to
input parameters and the simulated urban heat island in offline
simulations. J. Appl. Meteor. Clim. 47:1061-1076.

Oleson, K.W., et al. 2010a. Technical description of version 4.0 of the
Community Land model (CLM). NCAR Technical Note NCAR/TN-478+STR,
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, 257 pp.

Oleson, K.W., Bonan, G.B., Feddema, J., Vertenstein, M., and Kluzek, E.
2010b. Technical description of an urban parameterization for the
Community Land Model (CLMU). NCAR Technical Note NCAR/TN-480+STR,
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, 169 pp.

Olson, J.S., 1963. Energy storage and the balance of producers and
decomposers in ecological systems. Ecology 44:322-331.

Olson, D.M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E.D., Burgess, N.D., Powell,
G.V.N., Underwood, E.C., D’Amico, J.A., Itoua, I., Strand, H. E.,
Morrison, J. C., Loucks, C. J., Allnutt, T. F., Ricketts, T. H., Kura,
Y., Lamoreux, J. F., Wettengel, W. W., Heda, P., and Kassem, K. R.,
2001. Terrestrial ecoregions of the world a new map of life on earth,
Bioscience, 51, 933–938.

Orchard, V.A. and Cook, F.J., 1983. Relationship between soil
respiration and soil moisture. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 15:
447-453.

Owen, P.R. 1964. Saltation of uniform grains in air. J. Fluid Mech\ *.*
20:225-242.

Ozdogan, M., Rodell, M., Beaudoing, H.K., and Toll, D.L. 2010.
Simulating the effects of irrigation over the United States in a land
surface model based on satellite-derived agricultural data. Journal of
Hydrometeorology 11:171-184.

Page, S.E., Siegert, F., Rieley, J.O., Boehm, H-D.V., Jaya, A., and
Limin, S. 2002. The amount of carbon released from peat and forest fires
in Indonesia in 1997. Nature 420:61-65.

Panofsky, H.A., and Dutton, J.A. 1984. Atmospheric Turbulence: Models
and Methods for Engineering Applications. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Parton, W., Stewart, J. and Cole, C., 1988. Dynamics of C, N, P And S in
Grassland Soils - A Model. Biogeochemistry 5:109-131.

Parton, W.J., et al. 1993. Observations and modeling of biomass and soil
organic matter dynamics for the grassland biome worlwide. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles 7:785-809.

Parton, W. et al. 1996. Generalized model for N2 and N2O production from
nitrification and denitrification. Global Biogeochemical Cycles
10:401-412.

Parton, W.J. et al. 2001. Generalized model for NOx and N2O emissions
from soils. J. Geophys. Res. 106(D15):17403-17419.

Paterson, W.S.B., 1994. The Physics of Glaciers. Elsevier Science Inc.,
New York, 480 pp.

Petrescu, A.M.R. et al. 2010. Modeling regional to global CH4 emissions
of boreal and arctic wetlands. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 24(GB4009).

Philip, J.R. 1957. Evaporation, and moisture and heat fields in the
soil. J. Meteor. 14:354-366.

Piao, S.L., et al. 2012. The carbon budget of terrestrial ecosystems in
East Asia over the last two decades. Biogeosciences 9:3571-3586.

Pivovarov, A.A., 1972. Thermal Conditions in Freezing Lakes and
Reservoirs. John Wiley, New York.

Pollmer, W.G., Eberhard, D., Klein, D., and Dhillon, B.S. 1979. Genetic
control of nitrogen uptake and translocation in maize. Crop Sci.
19:82-86.

Portmann, F.T., Siebert, S., and Döll, P. 2010. MIRCA2000 - Global
monthly irrigated and rainfed crop areas around the year 2000: A new
high-resolution data set for agricultural and hydrological modeling.
Global Biogeochem. Cycles. 24, GB1011. DOI:10.1029/2008GB003435.

Press, W.H., Teukolsky, S.A., Vetterling, W.T., and Flannery, B.P. 1992.
Numerical Recipes in FORTRAN: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge
University Press, New York.

Prigent, C., Papa, F., Aires, F., Rossow, W.B. and Matthews, E. 2007.
Global inundation dynamics inferred from multiple satellite
observations, 1993-2000. J. Geophys. Res. 112(D12).

Pritchard, M.S., Bush, A.B.G., and Marshall, S.J. 2008. Neglecting
ice-atmosphere interactions underestimates ice sheet melt in
millennial-scale deglaciation simulations. Geophys. Res. Lett. **
35:L01503. DOI:10.1029/2007GL031738.

Qian, T., Dai, A., Trenberth, K.E., and Oleson, K.W. 2006. Simulation of
global land surface conditions from 1948 to 2004: Part I: Forcing data
and evaluations. J. Hydrometeor. 7:953-975.

Ramankutty, N., and Foley, J. A., 1998. Characterizing patterns of
global land use: An analysis of global croplands data. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles, 12, 667-685.

Ramankutty, N., Evan, A., Monfreda, C., and Foley, J.A. 2008. Farming
the Planet. Part 1: The Geographic Distribution of Global Agricultural
Lands in the Year 2000. Global Biogeochem. Cycles. 22:GB1003.
DOI:10.1029/2007GB002952.

Randlett, D.L., Zak, D.R., Pregitzer, K.S., and Curtis, P.S. 1996.
Elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide and leaf litter chemistry:
Influences on microbial respiration and net nitrogen mineralization.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 60:1571-1577.

Rastetter, E.B., Ryan, M.G., Shaver, G.R., Melillo, J.M., Nadelhoffer,
K.J., Hobbie, J.E., and Aber, J.D. 1991. A general biogeochemical model
describing the responses of the C and N cycles in terrestrial ecosystems
to changes in CO2, climate and N deposition. Tree Phys. 9:101-126.

Rastner, P., Bolch, T., Mölg, N., Machguth, H., and Paul, F., 2012. The
first complete glacier inventory for the whole of Greenland, The
Cryosphere Discuss., 6, 2399-2436, 10.5194/tcd-6-2399-2012.

Riley, W. J., Z. M. Subin, D. M. Lawrence, S. C. Swenson, M. S. Torn, L.
Meng, N. Mahowald, and P. Hess, 2011a. Barriers to predicting global
terrestrial methane fluxes: Analyses using a methane biogeochemistry
model integrated in CESM. Biogeosciences, 8, 1925–1953.
DOI:10.5194/bg-8-1925-2011.

Riley, W.J. et al. 2011b. CLM4Me, a Methane Biogeochemistry Model
Integrated in CESM, Land and Biogeochemistry Model Working Group
Meeting, Boulder, CO.

Ryan, M. G. 1991. A simple method for estimating gross carbon budgets
for vegetation in forest ecosystems. Tree Phys. 9:255-266.

Running, S.W. and Coughlan, J.C., 1988. A general model of forest
ecosystem processes for regional applications. I. Hydrological balance,
canopy gas exchange and primary production processes. Ecological
Modelling, 42: 125-154.

Running, S.W. et al., 1989. Mapping regional forest evapotranspiration
and photosynthesis by coupling satellite data with ecosystem simlation.
Ecology, 70: 1090-1101.

Running, S.W. and Gower, S.T., 1991. FOREST BGC, A general model of
forest ecosystem processes for regional applications. II. Dynamic carbon
allocation and nitrogen budgets. Tree Physiology, 9: 147-160.

Running, S.W. and Hunt, E.R., Jr., 1993. Generalization of a forest
ecosystem process model for other biomes, BIOME-BGC, and an
applicationfor global-scale models. In: J.R. Ehleringer and C. Field
(Editors), Scaling Physiological Processes: Leaf to Globe. Academic
Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 141-158.

Sacks, W. J., Cook, B. I., Buenning, N., Levis, S., and Helkowski, J. H.
2009. Effects of global irrigation on the near-surface climate. Climate
Dyn., 33, 159–175. DOI:10.1007/s00382-008-0445-z.

Saggar, S., Tate, K.R., Feltham, C.W., Childs, C.W. and Parshotam, A.,
1994. Carbon turnover in a range of allophanic soils amended with
:math:`{}^{14}`\ C-labelled glucose. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 26:
1263-1271.

Sakaguchi, K., and Zeng, X. 2009. Effects of soil wetness, plant litter,
and under-canopy atmospheric stability on ground evaporation in the
Community Land Model (CLM3.5). J. Geophys. Res. 114:D01107.
DOI:10.1029/2008JD010834.

Schaaf, C.B., Gao, F., Strahler, A.H., Lucht, W., Li, X., Tsang, T.,
Strugnell, N.C., Zhang, X., Jin, Y., and Muller, J.-P. 2002. First
operational BRDF, albedo nadir reflectance products from MODIS. Remote
Sens. Environ. 83:135-148.

Schlesinger, W.H., 1997. Biogeochemistry: an analysis of global change.
Academic Press, London, 588 pp.

Schnell, S. and King, G.M., 1996. Responses of methanotrophic activity
in soils and cultures to water stress. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 62:3203-3209.

Segers, R., 1998. Methane production and methane consumption: a review
of processes underlying wetland methane fluxes. Biogeochemistry
41:23-51.

Sellers, P.J. 1985. Canopy reflectance, photosynthesis and
transpiration. Int. J. Remote Sens. 6:1335-1372.

Sellers, P.J., Mintz, Y., Sud, Y.C., and Dalcher, A. 1986. A simple
biosphere model (SiB) for use within general circulation models. J.
Atmos. Sci. 43:505-531.

Sellers, P.J., Hall, F.G., Asrar, G., Strebel, D.E., and Murphy, R.E.
1988. The First ISLSCP Field Experiment (FIFE). Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.
69:22-27.

Sellers, P.J., Berry, J.A., Collatz, G.J., Field, C.B., and Hall, F.G.
1992. Canopy reflectance, photosynthesis, and transpiration. III. A
reanalysis using improved leaf models and a new canopy integration
scheme. Remote Sens. Environ. 42:187-216.

Sellers, P.J., et al. 1995. The Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study
(BOREAS): An overview and early results from the 1994 field year. Bull.
Amer. Meteor. Soc. 76:1549-1577.

Sellers, P.J., Randall, D.A., Collatz, G.J., Berry, J.A., Field, C.B.,
Dazlich, D.A., Zhang, C., Collelo, G.D., and Bounoua, L. 1996. A revised
land surface parameterization (SiB2) for atmospheric GCMs. Part I: Model
formulation. J. Climate 9:676-705.

Shi, X., Mao, J., Thornton, P.E., and Huang, M. 2013. Spatiotemporal
patterns of evapotranspiration in response to multiple environmental
factors simulated by the Community Land Model. Environ. Res. Lett.
8:024012.

Shiklomanov, I.A. 2000. Appraisal and assessment of world water
resources. Water International 25:11-32.

Siebert, S., Döll, P., Hoogeveen, J., Faures, J.M., Frenken, K., Feick,
S., 2005. Development and validation of the global map of irrigation
areas. Hydrol Earth Syst Sc 9:535–547

Simpson, R.J., Lambers, H., and Dalling, M.J. 1983. Nitrogen
redistribution during grain growth in wheat (Triticum avestivum L.).
Plant Physiol. 71:7-14.

Smith, A.M.S., Wooster, M.J., Drake, N.A., Dipotso, F.M. and Perry,
G.L.W., 2005. Fire in African savanna: Testing the impact of incomplete
combustion on pyrogenic emissions estimates. Ecological Applications,
15: 1074-1082.

Sollins, P., 1982. Input and decay of coarse woody debris in coniferous
stands in western Oregon and Washington. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research, 12: 18-28.

Son, Y. and Gower, S.T., 1991. Aboveground nitrogen and phosphorus use
by five plantation-grown trees with different leaf longevities.
Biogeochemistry, 14: 167-191.

Sørensen, L.H., 1981. Carbon-nitrogen relationships during the
humification of cellulose in soils containing different amounts of clay.
Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 13: 313-321.

Sprugel, D.G., Ryan, M.G., Brooks, J.R., Vogt, K.A., and Martin, T.A.
1995. Respiration from the organ level to stand level. pp. 255-299. In:
W. K. Smith and T. M. Hinkley (editors) Resource Physiology of Conifers.
Academic Press, San Diego,CA.

Stauffer, D., and Aharony, A. 1994. Introduction to Percolation Theory.
Taylor and Francis, London.

Still, C.J., Berry, J.A., Collatz, G.J., and DeFries, R.S. 2003. Global
distribution of C3 and C4 vegetation: carbon cycle implications. Global
Biogeochem. Cycles 17:1006. DOI:10.1029/2001GB001807.

Stöckli, R., Lawrence, D.M., Niu, G.-Y., Oleson, K.W., Thornton, P.E.,
Yang, Z.-L., Bonan, G.B., Denning, A.S., and Running, S.W. 2008. Use of
FLUXNET in the Community Land Model development. J. Geophys. Res.
113:G01025. DOI:10.1029/2007JG000562.

Strack, M., Kellner, E. and Waddington, J.M., 2006. Effect of entrapped
gas on peatland surface level fluctuations. Hydrological Processes
20:3611-3622.

Strahler, A.H., Muchoney, D., Borak, J., Friedl, M., Gopal, S., Lambin,
E., and Moody. A. 1999. MODIS Land Cover Product: Algorithm Theoretical
Basis Document (Version 5.0). Boston University, Boston.

Stull, R.B. 1988. An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

Subin, Z.M., Riley, W.J. and Mironov, D. 2012a. Improved lake model for
climate simulations, J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst., 4, M02001.
DOI:10.1029/2011MS000072.

Subin, Z.M., Murphy, L.N., Li, F., Bonfils, C. and Riley, W.J., 2012b.
Boreal lakes moderate seasonal and diurnal temperature variation and
perturb atmospheric circulation: analyses in the Community Earth System
Model 1 (CESM1). Tellus A, North America, 64.

Sun, Y., Gu, L., and Dickinson, R. E. 2012. A numerical issue in
calculating the coupled carbon and water fluxes in a climate model, J.
Geophys. Res., 117, D22103. DOI:10.1029/2012JD018059.

Swenson, S.C., Lawrence, D.M., and Lee, H. 2012. Improved Simulation of
the Terrestrial Hydrological Cycle in Permafrost Regions by the
Community Land Model. JAMES, 4, M08002. DOI:10.1029/2012MS000165.

Swenson, S.C. and Lawrence, D.M. 2012. A New Fractional Snow Covered
Area Parameterization for the Community Land Model and its Effect on the
Surface Energy Balance. JGR, 117, D21107. DOI:10.1029/2012JD018178.

Ta, C.T. and Weiland, R.T. 1992. Nitrogen partitioning in maize during
ear development. Crop Sci. 32:443-451.

Tang, J.Y. and Riley, W.J. 2013. A new top boundary condition for
modeling surface diffusive exchange of a generic volatile tracer:
Theoretical analysis and application to soil evaporation. Hydrol. Earth
Syst. Sci. 17:873-893.

Tarnocai, C., Kettles, I. M., and Lacelle, B., 2011. Peatlands of
Canada, Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 6561, CD-ROM.
DOI:10.495/288786.

Taylor, B.R., Parkinson, D. and Parsons, W.F.J., 1989. Nitrogen and
lignin content as predictors of litter decay rates: A microcosm test.
Ecology, 70: 97-104.

Thonicke, K., Venevsky, S., Sitch, S., and Cramer, W. 2001. The role of
fire disturbance for global vegetation dynamics: coupling fire into a
Dynamic Global Vegetation Model. Global Ecology and Biogeography
10:661-667.

Thornton, P.E., 1998. Regional ecosystem simulation: combining surface-
and satellite-based observations to study linkages between terrestrial
energy and mass budgets. Ph.D. Thesis, The University of Montana,
Missoula, 280 pp.

Thornton, P.E., Law, B.E., Gholz, H.L., Clark, K.L., Falge, E.,
Ellsworth, D.S., Goldstein, A.H., Monson, R.K., Hollinger, D., Falk, M.,
Chen, J., and Sparks, J.P. 2002. Modeling and measuring the effects of
disturbance history and climate on carbon and water budgets in evergreen
needleleaf forests. Agric. For. Meteor. 113:185-222.

Thornton, P.E., and Rosenbloom, N.A. 2005. Ecosystem model spin-up:
estimating steady state conditions in a coupled terrestrial carbon and
nitrogen cycle model. Ecological Modelling 189:25-48.

Thornton, P.E., and Zimmermann, N.E. 2007. An improved canopy
integration scheme for a land surface model with prognostic canopy
structure. J. Climate 20:3902-3923.

Thornton, P.E., Lamarque, J.-F., Rosenbloom, N.A., and Mahowald, N.M.
2007. Influence of carbon-nitrogen cycle coupling on land model response
to CO\ :sub:`2` fertilization and climate variability. Global
Biogeochem. Cycles 21:GB4018.

Thornton, P.E., Doney, S.C., Lindsay, K., Moore, J.K., Mahowald, N.,
Randerson, J.T., Fung, I., Lamarque, J.F., Feddema, J.J., and Lee, Y.H.
2009. Carbon-nitrogen interactions regulate climate-carbon cycle
feedbacks: results from an atmosphere-ocean general circulation model.
Biogeosci. 6:2099-2120.

Tian, H. et al. 2010. Spatial and temporal patterns of CH4 and N2O
fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems of North America during 1979-2008:
application of a global biogeochemistry model. Biogeosciences
7:2673-2694.

Toon, O.B., McKay, C.P., Ackerman, T.P., and Santhanam, K. 1989. Rapid
calculation of radiative heating rates and photodissociation rates in
inhomogeneous multiple scattering atmospheres. J. Geophys. Res.
94(D13):16,287-16,301.

Turetsky, M.R., Wieder, R.K., Halsey, L.A., and Vitt, D.H. 2002. Current
disturbance and the diminishing peatland carbon sink. Geophys. Res.
Lett. 29:1526. DOI:10.1029/2001GL014000.

Turetsky, M.R., Amiro, B.D., Bosch, E., andBhatti, J.S. 2004. Historical
burn area in western Canadian peatlands and its relationship to fire
weather indices. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 18:GB4014.
DOI:10.1029/2004GB002222.

Turnbull, J.C. et al. 2007. A new high precision (CO2)-C-14 time series
for North American continental air. Journal of Geophysical
Research-Atmospheres 112(D11).

Tye, A.M., et al. 2005. The fate of N-15 added to high Arctic tundra to
mimic increased inputs of atmospheric nitrogen released from a melting
snowpack. Global Change Biology 11:1640-1654.

Unland, H.E., Houser, P.R., Shuttleworth, W.J., and Yang, Z.-L. 1996.
Surface flux measurement and modeling at a semi-arid Sonoran Desert
site. Agric. For. Meteor. 82:119-153.

UNSTAT, 2005. National Accounts Main Aggregates Database, United Nations
Statistics Division.

Vallano, D.M. and Sparks, J.P. 2007. Quantifying foliar uptake of
gaseous itrogen dioxide using enriched foliar
:math:`\delta^{15}`\  N values. New Phytologist
177:946-955.

van der Werf, G.R., Randerson, J.T., Giglio, L., Collatz, G.J., Mu, M.,
Kasibhatla, S.P., Morton, D.C., DeFries, R.S., Jin, Y., van Leeuwen,
T.T. 2010. Global fire emissions and the contribution of deforestation,
savanna, forest, agricultural, and peat fires (1997-2009) Atmos. Chem.
Phys. 10:11707-11735.

van Veen, J.A., Ladd, J.N. and Frissel, M.J., 1984. Modelling C and N
turnover through the microbial biomass in soil. Plant and Soil, 76:
257-274.

Van Vuuren, D.P., Lucas, P.S., and Hilderink, H.B.M., 2006. Downscaling
drivers of global environmental change: enabling use of global SRES
scenarios at the national and grid levels, Report 550025001, Netherlands
Environmental Assessment Agency, 45 pp.

Vanninen, P., and Makela, A. 2005. Carbon budget for Scots pine trees:
effects of size, competition and site fertility on growth allocation and
production. Tree Phys. 25:17-30.

Verdin, K. L., and S. K. Greenlee, 1996. Development of continental
scale digital elevation models and extraction of hydrographic features,
paper presented at the Third International Conference/Workshop on
Integrating GIS and Environmental Modeling, Santa Fe, New Mexico, 21–26
January, Natl. Cent. for Geogr. Inf. and Anal., Santa Barbara, Calif.

Viovy, N. 2011. CRUNCEP dataset. [Description available at
http://dods.extra.cea.fr/data/p529viov/cruncep/readme.htm. Data
available at
http://dods.extra.cea.fr/store/p529viov/cruncep/V4\_1901\_2011/].

Vitousek, P.M., and Howarth, R.W. 1991. Nitrogen limitation on land and
in the sea: How can it occur? Biogeochem. 13:87-115.

Walter, B.P., Heimann, M. and Matthews, E., 2001. Modeling modern
methane emissions from natural wetlands 1. Model description and
results. J. Geophys. Res. 106(D24):34189-34206.

Wania, R., Ross, I. and Prentice, I.C. 2009. Integrating peatlands and
permafrost into a dynamic global vegetation model: 2. Evaluation and
sensitivity of vegetation and carbon cycle processes. Global Biogeochem.
Cycles 23.

Wania, R., Ross, I. and Prentice, I.C. 2010. Implementation and
evaluation of a new methane model within a dynamic global vegetation
model LPJ-WHyMe v1.3. Geoscientific Model Development Discussions
3:1-59.

Wang, A., and Zeng, X. 2009. Improving the treatment of vertical snow
burial fraction over short vegetation in the NCAR CLM3. Adv. Atmos. Sci.
26:877-886. DOI:10.1007/s00376-009-8098-3.

White, M.A., Thornton, P.E., and Running, S.W. 1997. A continental
phenology model for monitoring vegetation responses to interannual
climatic variability. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 11:217-234.

White, M.A., Thornton, P.E., Running, S.W., and Nemani, R.R. 2000.
Parameterization and sensitivity analysis of the Biome-BGC terrestrial
ecosystem model: net primary production controls. Earth Interactions
4:1-85.

Wiscombe, W.J., and Warren, S.G. 1980. A model for the spectral albedo
of snow. I. Pure snow. J. Atmos. Sci. 37:2712-2733.

Wood, E.F., Lettenmaier, D.P., and Zartarian, V.G. 1992. A land-surface
hydrology parameterization with subgrid variability for general
circulation models. J. Geophys. Res. 97(D3):2717–2728.
DOI:10.1029/91JD01786.

World Bank, 2004. World development indicators 2004, Oxford University
Press, New York, 416 pp.

Yang, Z.-L. 1998. Technical note of a 10-layer soil moisture and
temperature model. Unpublished manuscript.

Zender, C.S., Bian, H., and Newman, D. 2003. Mineral dust entrainment
and deposition (DEAD) model: Description and 1990s dust climatology. **
J. Geophys. Res\ *.* 108(D14):4416. DOI:10.1029/2002JD002775.

Zeng, X., and Dickinson, R.E. 1998. Effect of surface sublayer on
surface skin temperature and fluxes. J.Climate 11:537-550.

Zeng, X., Zhao, M., and Dickinson, R.E. 1998. Intercomparison of bulk
aerodynamic algorithms for the computation of sea surface fluxes using
the TOGA COARE and TAO data. J. Climate 11:2628-2644.

Zeng, X. 2001. Global vegetation root distribution for land modeling. J.
Hydrometeor. 2:525-530.

Zeng, X., Shaikh, M., Dai, Y., Dickinson, R.E., and Myneni, R. 2002.
Coupling of the Common Land Model to the NCAR Community Climate Model.
J. Climate 15:1832-1854.

Zeng, X., Dickinson, R.E., Barlage, M., Dai, Y., Wang, G., and Oleson,
K. 2005. Treatment of under-canopy turbulence in land models. J. Climate
18:5086-5094.

Zeng, X., and Wang, A. 2007. Consistent parameterization of roughness
length and displacement height for sparse and dense canopies in land
models. J. Hydrometeor. 8:730-737.

Zeng, X., and Decker, M. 2009. Improving the numerical solution of soil
moisture-based Richards equation for land models with a deep or shallow
water table. J. Hydrometeor. 10:308-319.

Zeng, X., Zeng, X., and Barlage, M. 2008. Growing temperate shrubs over
arid and semiarid regions in the Community Land Model - Dynamic Global
Vegetation Model. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 22:GB3003.
DOI:10.1029/2007GB003014.

Zhang, Y., Li, C.S., Trettin, C.C., Li, H. and Sun, G., 2002. An
integrated model of soil, hydrology, and vegetation for carbon dynamics
in wetland ecosystems. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 16.
DOI:10.1029/2001GB001838.

Zhuang, Q., et al. 2004. Methane fluxes between terrestrial ecosystems
and the atmosphere at northern high latitudes during the past century: A
retrospective analysis with a process-based biogeochemistry model.
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 18. DOI:10.1029/2004GB002239.

Zilitinkevich, S.S. 1970. Dynamics of the Atmospheric Boundary Layer.
Leningrad Gidrometeor.
